# Characterization of the mutation spectrum of the ciliate, Tetrahymena thermophila 

Mutations are the ultimate source of genetic variation, therefore knowledge of the mutation rate is critical to understanding all aspects of molecular evolution including the rate of adaption, fitness costs, and the influence of selection and genetic drift. Recent studies on the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila presented conflicting narratives regarding germline mutations. Long et al. [2013](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23934880/) reported a dramatic decline in fitness over 1000 generations of mutation accumulation (MA) experiments, which they attributed to the accumulation of deleterious mutations. However, in a subsequent [paper](https://academic.oup.com/gbe/article/8/12/3629/2669853) Long and colleagues sequenced 8 MA lines and identified only 5 point-mutations.  They estimated that T. thermophila had a record-low point-mutation rate of 1 mutation per genome per 1300 generations. Therefore, they determined that point mutations were unlikely responsible for the measured decline in fitness of these lines. 

To capture genomic variants frequently missed by standard mutation calling pipelines, we used software for calling complex variants and then processing the resulting calls with Denovogear4 to identify de novo variants. Denovogear is a statistical software package developed in the Cartwright Lab at ASU that predicts the location of de novo variants based on models of biological and experimental processes, which has been shown to reduce the false positive rate of mutation discovery. The software for the initial mutation calling includes `GATK HaplotypeCaller` and `IMSindel`, which utilizes both paired-end mapping and de novo assembly to detect insertions or deletions less than 1000 base-pairs. 
